6.824 2016 Lecture 4: Primary/Backup Replication

Today
  Primary/Backup Replication
    Widely-used: e.g., GFS chunk servers
    But today with strong consistency ("Ideal")
    So important, explore in more depth
  VM-FT case study

Fault tolerance
  we'd like a service that continues despite failures!
  available: still useable despite [some class of] failures
  strong consistency: act just like a single server to clients
    stronger than what GFS provides for files
  very hard!
  very useful!

Need a failure model: what will we try to cope with?
  Independent fail-stop computer failure
   VM-FT further assumes only one failure at a time
  Site-wide power failure (and eventual reboot)
  Network partition
  No bugs, no malice

Core idea: replication
  *Two* servers (or more)
  Each replica keeps state needed for the service
  If one replica fails, others can continue

Example: fault-tolerant MapReduce master
  lab 1 workers are already fault-tolerant, but not master
    master is a "single point of failure"
  can we have two masters, in case one fails?
  [diagram: M1, M2, workers]
  state:
    worker list
    which jobs done
    which workers idle
    TCP connection state
    program counter

Big Questions:
  What state to replicate?
  How does replica get state?
  When to cut over to backup?
  Are anomalies visible at cut-over?
  How to repair / re-integrate?

Two main approaches:
  State transfer
    "Primary" replica executes the service
    Primary sends [new] state to backups
  Replicated state machine
    All replicas execute all operations
    If same start state,
      same operations,
      same order,
      deterministic,
      then same end state

State transfer is simpler
  But state may be large, slow to transfer
  VM-FT uses replicated state machine

Replicated state machine can be more efficient
  If operations are small compared to data
  But complex to get right
    e.g. order on multi-core, determinism
  Labs use replicated state machines

What is the replicated state machine?
  K/V put and get?
  x86 instructions?
  Impacts performance and ease of implementation
    how much interaction is necessary between primary and backup
      high-level abstract machines can communicate less info
    dealing with non-determinism is hard on x86 level but easier on put/get level
  higher-level RSM works only for apps that use the higher-level interface
    x86 RSM can execute any x86 program

The design of a Practical System for Fault-Tolerant Virtual Machines
Scales, Nelson, and Venkitachalam, SIGOPS OSR Vol 44, No 4, Dec 2010

Very ambitious system:
  Whole-system replication
  Completely transparent to applications and clients
  High availability for any existing software
  Would be magic if it worked well!
  Failure model:
    1. independent hardware faults
    2. site-wide power failure
  Limited to uniprocessor VMs
    Q: What is hard about multicore processors?

Overview
  [diagram: app, O/S, VM-FT underneath]
  two machines, primary and backup; and other machines
  two networks: clients-to-servers, logging channel
  shared-disk for persistent storage
  back-up in "lock step" with primary
    primary sends all inputs to backup
    outputs of backup are dropped
  heart beats between primary and backup
    if primary fails, start backup executing!

What are the inputs?
  clock interrupts
  network interrupt
  disk interrupts

Challenges:
  1. Making it look  like a single reliable server
    What will outside world see if primary fails and replica takes over?
      if primary fails just before or after sending response to client
      might a client request be lost? executed twice?
    When does the primary send a response to a client?
  2. How to avoid two primaries?  (the "split-brain syndrome")
    What if the logging channel breaks?
    Will both primary and backup be primaries?
  3. How to make backup an exact replica of primary
    What operations must send to backup?
      Clock interrupts?
    How to deal with non-determinism?
      E.g., Interrupt must be delivered at backup at same instruction as at primary

Challenge 3 solution: deterministic replay
  Goal: make x86 platform deterministic
    idea: use hypervisor to make virtual x86 platform deterministic
    two phases: logging and replay
  Log all hardware events into a log
    clock interrupts, network interrupts, i/o interrupts, etc.
    for non-deterministic instructions, record additional info
      e.g., log the value of the time stamp register
      on replay: return the value from the log instead of the actual register
  Replay: delivery inputs in the same order at the same instructions
    if during recording delivered clock interrupt at nth instruction executed
    during replay also delivers the clock interrupt at the nth instruction
  Given a log of events, deterministic replay recreates VM
    hypervisor delivers first event
    lets the machine execute to the next event
      using special hardware registers to stop the processor at the right instruction
    the virtual x86 executes identical during replay as during recording
      OS runs identical
      Applications runs identical
      -> Same outputs will be generated on replay as during recording
  Limitation: cannot handle multicore processors x86
    Too expensive to record and replay the correct interleaving of instructions

Application of deterministic replay to VM-FT:
  Hypervisor at primary records
    Sends log entries to backup over logging channel
  Hypervisor at backup replays log entries
    We need to stop virtual x86 at instruction of next event
    We need to what next event is
    -> backup lags behind one event
    
Example:
  primary receives network interrupt
    hypervisor forwards interrupt plus data to backup
    hypervisor delivers network interrupt to OS kernel
    OS kernel runs
    kernel delivers packet to server
    server/kernel write response to network card
    hypervisor gets control and puts response on the wire
  backup receives log entries
    backup delivers network interrupt
    hypervisor delivers interrupt to its OS kernel
    ...
    server/kernel sends response to network card
    hypervisor gets control
      does *not* put response on the wire
    hypervisor ignores local clock interrupts
      it gets clock interrupts from primary
  primary and backup get same inputs, end up in same state

Challenge 1 solution: FT protocol
  Primary delays any output until the backup acks
    Log entry for each output operation
    Primary sends output after backup acked receiving output operation
  Performance optimization:
    primary keeps executing passed output operations
    buffers output until backup acknowledges

Q: Why send output events to backup and delay output until backup has acked?
  Consider: don't log output events. Log only input events.
  Primary:
    process network input
    produces output
    primary fails
  Backup cannot reproduce this sequence correctly:
    last log entry is: process network input
      deliver it to kernel
    backup goes "live"
      it becomes the primary
    hardware interrupt (e.g., clock)
      deliver it to the kernel  (since backup is live now)
    the network input results in output
      did the primary produce output before hardware interrupt or before?
      backup doesn't know
        it doesn't have a log entry for the interrupt
	it doesn't have a log entry for output
      important because clock interrupt may have influenced output
  By sending start output event to backup, backup can order events correctly
    clock interrupt before or after start output event

Q: Can primary and backup produce the same output event? 
  A: yes!
  Primary sends start output event to backup
  Primary produces output
  Primary fails
  Backup declares primary dead
  Backup replays through the start output event
  Backup become live
  Backup executes output event
  --> Authors claim producing output twice is *not* a problem
    if output is network packet, client must be able to handle duplicate packets
    if output is write to disk, write the same data twice to the same location
      but there cannot any other writes in between (they would have been in the log)
      so, should be ok
    if output is read to disk, read the same data twice to the same location in memory
      use bounce buffers to eliminate DMA race
      deliver data on I/O completion interrupt
    
Q: What happens when primary fails after receiving network input but before
sending a corresponding log entry to backup?
  A: network input. service relies on client to retry.
    this is reasonable because network could have lost request packet
  A: disk input. hypervisor restarts pending disk I/O

Challenge 2 solution: shared disk
  Hard problem with only unreliable network!
    See next week's lectures
  Paper's solution: assume shared disk
    Backup replays through last log entry
    Backup atomically test-and-set variable on disk
      If set, primary is still alive. Commit suicide
      If not set, primary is dead. Become primary
      If primary, create new backup from checkpoint
        Using VMotion
      
Shared storage is single-point of failure
    If shared storage is down, service is down
  Ok for paper's setting, but for geo-replicate services
    Cannot survive earthquakes

Q: Why not have primary record log on shared disk, then backup replays log?
  Advantage: No logging channel necessary, no FT protocol, etc.

Q: How long is service unavailable after primary fails?
  Detect failure
  Execute log entries
    VM-FT slows down primary if backup gets too far behind
  Write shared storage
  Switch to "live"

Implementation challenges:
  Networking stack
    Asynchronous events trap to hypervisor
    Reduce extra delay caused by communicating network output to backup
  Disk I/O
    DMA

Performance (table 1)
  FT/Non-FT: impressive!
    little slow down
  Logging bandwidth
    18 Mbit/s for my-sql
      Due because backup doesn't read from disk
      With reading from locak disk: 8 Mbit/s
  Net apps: FT limits network bandwidth significantly
    All input packages must be forwarded to backup
  Not good enough for high-performance services?

Summary:
  Primary-backup replication
    VM-FT: clean example
  How to deal with split-brain syndrom?
    Next lecture
  How to get better performance?
    Primary-back replication using higher-level replicated state machines
      key/value operations such as put and get

  
----

VMware KB (#1013428) talks about multi-CPU support.  VM-FT may have switched
from a replicated state machine approach to the state transfer approach, but
unclear whether that is true or not.

http://www.wooditwork.com/2014/08/26/whats-new-vsphere-6-0-fault-tolerance/
http://www.tomsitpro.com/articles/vmware-vsphere-6-fault-tolerance-multi-cpu,1-2439.html
